well it was the first drone strike that
the u.s. had conducted since President
Obama's national security speech now
Pakistani officials as well as the
Taliban have confirmed that the drone
hit its mark while the air Redmond was
the Pakistani Taliban's number two
commander Rickman and six others were
killed in the strike he was accused of
helping coordinate the 2009 suicide
bombing on a US base in Afghanistan that
killed seven Americans as well as
hundreds of bombings and shootings
across Pakistan without missing a beat
the Pakistani Taliban announced today
that it has chosen a new deputy
commander to replace its deceased deputy
reference successor is 38 year old con
Syed he was allegedly involved in a 2011
tack on the Pakistani naval base in
Karachi where 18 people were killed as
well as the 2011 jailbreak where some
hung 400 militant inmates actually
escaped so what really came out of this
drone strike and did the president
follow the guidelines that he laid out
on Thursday to help me break this all
down I'm joined now by marcy wheeler
she's an investigative reporter at empty
wheel dot net Marcie let's start off by
talking about this most recent drone
strike what did it accomplish and did
the president follow his own guidelines
the president actually did although only
if you look at the fine print in his
speech in it he actually said well the
Afghan theater is exempt from all these
rules and will be exempt until we
withdraw from Afghanistan so what he was
a what he was you know whatever rules
they have imposed and it's not at all
clear what rules they have imposed don't
apply to Pakistan so the CIA will still
run the pakistani strikes the CIA can
still do signature strikes in Pakistan
and CIA can still strike people as they
did in the strike the Pakistani Taliban
who are technically our enemies there
Pakistan's enemies based on the logic
that were preventing the Pakistani
Taliban from letting troops rush across
the border into Afghanistan and hurt our
own troops but Marcia in that same
speech he also said that it would
tek al Qaeda and its associated forces
and that they would rather detain them
and that they would have respect state
sovereignty so is it true really what
you just said that he is abiding by what
he said and that just because it's
outside of the Afghan theater that that
kind of negates everything else right I
mean no he is not abiding by the rules
about state sovereignty one of the
really interesting things about this
strike is that it's clear the Pakistani
military is I their intelligence
services would approve of this strike
because they've been going up the
Pakistani Taliban for a long time but as
McClatchy reported I think a really good
wrap up on this what it did do is Noah
Sharif who just was elected in Pakistan
have been talking about making peace
with the Pakistani Taliban and since
this strike the Pakistani Taliban have
said no peace talks are off and so when
we talk about sovereignty are we just
talking about the military in a country
that is ostensibly a democracy because
that's what it looks like with regards
to this strike and something looks like
something very interesting to bring up
during this these talks of Pakistan and
possible reconciliation with the
Pakistani Taliban is that Redman was
said to be the one that was really
trying to push for this reconciliation
with the Afghani guy with the Pakistani
government excuse me but beyond that I
want to play part of President Obama's
speech from last Thursday here is him
talking about how these strikes have
haunted him for me and those in my chain
of command those deaths will haunt us as
long as we live just as we are haunted
by the civilian casualties that have
occurred throughout conventional
fighting in Afghanistan in Iraq
but as commander-in-chief I must weigh
these heartbreaking tragedies against
the alternatives to do nothing in the
face of terrorist networks would invite
far more civilian casualties so here we
hear the president talking about how
tough of a decision of each and every
single one of these drone strikes is
this most recent one had six other
people killed some of them were in the
Taliban some of them were not and we
have seen our reduction in the number of
drone strikes this year what should we
make of this is it the Obama
administration changing its ways or is
it just still very early in the year
well i mean i think what obama is just
trying to sell us on on drone strikes
it's the argument that harold koh has
been making which is we're gonna strike
you know that you know in his speech
Obama also talked about maybe we should
be putting more money into into support
but you know ultimately what the speech
was about was trying to sell us on the
drone strikes he's already he's already
engaged in as the most humane option
because we're not going to talk about
non-military options and so on that
basis it's not clear that much is going
to change anytime soon and finally Marci
we have a short amount of time left but
the president in that speech had said
that there will be more transparency
when it comes to drone strikes now the
White House has not said anything in
terms of this drone strike actually
having taken place and in terms of the
enemy actually being killed so are we
seeing that transparency or should we
expect it in the future we're not
sitting transparency what we're seeing
is a list of very fluid rules with some
giant caveats that you could drive you
know 12 drones through and you know the
administration still doesn't want I mean
they're not being transparent about the
Pakistani strike they're not being
transparent about when they engage in it
they're not being transparent about the
rules so I'm not holding my breath for
more real transparency well we know this
isn't the first strike that has happened
in Pakistan this year there have been 13
others and it certainly won't be the
last marcy wheeler investigative
reporter with empty wield net thanks